# Assignment 1: Trip-Sharing Simulation

**IMPORTANT NOTES:**

1. **START EARLY**! 

	- It's important that you start early on the Assignment so that you get help in a timely manner. We *cannot guarantee answers on the discussion board on the last 12 hours before the deadline*!
2. **PRIVATE POSTS** 

	-	If you are asking about ideas from your implementation, or include pieces of code, *your Piazza post must be set as private to all Instructors*. 
	-	If it is a general question on A1, please use a public post, so that we answer the same question only once and avoid clutter. Please use the search feature as well to find if your question was asked before.
3. **DEBUGGING**: 
	
	-	It is *your responsibility to write tests and debug your code to make sure it works and conforms to specifications*. 
	-	If you need help, *you must show us what you've tried to debug your code first, or what tests you've written*, as applicable. 
4. **TESTING**: 

    - We want to help you so we give you some very basic sample tests for A1. However, these are *only to help you start testing your code*! If you pass these sample tests, *it only means you're on track, not that you will pass our own tests*. 
    - You have to write your own (*good!*) tests to make sure your code works. You may not share tests with others, everyone has to get used to writing tests, as it's an important skill to develop.
5. **HELP CENTRE**: 
    - Please note the **Help Centre hours** posted on the discussion board, which are additional TA-run office hours we are providing you for help with assignments. Make sure to take advantage of all these supports we give you, as we want everyone to get enough support and to succeed.

## Table of contents
  - [Assignment 1: Trip-Sharing Simulation](#assignment-1-trip-sharing-simulation)
  - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Learning Goals](#learning-goals)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Simulation Overview](#simulation-overview)
  - [passenger class details](#passenger-class-details)
  - [driver class details](#driver-class-details)
  - [dispatcher class details](#dispatcher-class-details)
  - [event class details](#event-class-details)
  - [simulation class details](#simulation-class-details)
  - [monitor class details](#monitor-class-details)
  - [location class details](#location-class-details)
  - [container class details](#container-class-details)
  - [how to use starter code](#how-to-use-starter-code)
  - [submitting your work](#submitting-your-work)
## Learning Goals

By the end of this assignment you should be able to:

-   read code you didn't write and understand its design and implementation, including:

	- reading the class and method docstrings carefully (including attributes, representation invariants, preconditions, etc.)
	- determining relationships between classes, 
		by applying your knowledge of composition
		and inheritance
-   complete a partial implementation of a class, including:
    - reading the representation invariants to enforce important facts about implementation decisions
    - reading the preconditions to factor in assumptions that they permit
    - writing the required methods
-   implement a class from a provided specification, including:
    - defining instance attributes and methods
    - writing the class documentation and method docstrings
    - implementing the class functionality according to specs
    - using inheritance: defining a subclass of another class

## Overview
Car testers use crash-test dummies because the danger of human carnage
is too great to use living subjects.  Climatologists build
computer models of changing meteorological patterns because they can't afford
the decades or centuries to wait observing the actual
patterns.  

Computer simulations are great for exploring "what if" questions
about scenarios before, or instead of, letting those scenarios play
out in the real world.  In this assignment, you'll create a simulation
of a trip-sharing service to see the effect of different scenarios.
We hope this is a safer and faster approach than having taxis, Uber,
passengers, and municipal politicians live through the scenarios on the streets.

This assignment will give you experience reading, understanding,
designing and implementing several interacting classes to model
prospective passengers with varying amounts of patience, available drivers
starting from various locations, and dispatchers trying to match up
the passengers and drivers.  You'll also work on implementations of
classes to run the simulation and monitor the results, and provide
utilities such as sequences to hold objects and a class to represent
locations on a grid.

## Simulation Overview

The simulation consists of four key entities: Passengers, drivers, the dispatcher,
and the monitor. Passengers request trips from their current location to a destination.
Drivers drive to pick up and drop off passengers. The dispatcher receives and satisfies
requests from drivers for a passenger, and from passengers for a driver. The monitor
keeps track of activities in the simulation, and when asked, generates a
report of what happened during the simulation.

The simulation plays out on a simplified city grid, where the location
of passengers and drivers is the intersection they are closest to. An
intersection is represented by a pair of positive integers: The number of a
north/south street, and the number of an east/west street. For example
1,2 is the intersection of Street 1 north/south with Street 2 east/west.



When a passenger requests a driver, the dispatcher tries to assign a driver to the passenger.
If there is no driver available, the dispatcher keeps track
of the passenger request, waiting for a driver to become available.
A passenger will cancel their request if they have to wait too long for
a pick up.

When a driver requests a passenger, the dispatcher assigns a waiting passenger, if any.
If this is the driver's first request, the dispatcher registers the driver in
its fleet. Once registered, a driver never unregisters.




And so it goes.  There is clearly a connection between how long passengers
are waiting to be picked up and how many drivers are available and
waiting to be assigned passengers.  Our simulation can measure how this
connection affects passenger waiting times and driver earnings.  It will
need to monitor all appropriate events: passengers requesting trips, being
picked up (or possibly cancelling first), then being dropped off; and
drivers requesting to be assigned passengers.

## passenger class details
A passenger has a unique identifier, an origin, a destination and a status.
The passenger's status is one of waiting to be picked up, cancelled, or
satisfied (after they have been picked up). A passenger also
has a patience attribute: The number of time units that the passenger will wait to be
picked up before they cancel their trip.

## driver class details
A driver has a unique identifier, a location, and, possibly, a destination.
A driver knows their car's speed; for simplicity this speed is constant.
A driver can determine how long it will take to travel from their
current location to a destination by calculating the
[Manhattan distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry) and dividing it by the car's speed.
This calculation is rounded to the nearest integer.

If a driver does not have a destination, the driver is idle.
When a driver first becomes idle, the driver requests a passenger.  If assigned
a passenger, the driver drives to the passenger's location. If the
passenger does not cancel before the pickup, the driver then picks up the passenger and drives
to the destination. When the trip starts, the driver learns the identity of
the passenger and the passenger's destination.

## dispatcher class details

The dispatcher keeps track of both available drivers and waiting
passengers, based on passengers requesting trips and drivers announcing
their availability.  However, the dispatchers don't make this
information public.  

When a passenger requests a trip, the dispatcher finds the driver who reports
that they can pick up the passenger the fastest, and assigns that passenger to the driver.
If there is no driver available, the dispatcher places the passenger on a
waiting list, waiting for a driver to become available.

If a passenger gets fed up waiting, they tell the dispatcher that they
are cancelling their trip request, and the dispatcher removes them
from the waiting list.  However, the passenger may have already been
assigned to a driver, who will arrive at the passenger's location to
find that the passenger has gone.

When a driver announces their availability to drive, the dispatcher
registers the driver as part of the driving fleet based on their driver identification (if the driver has
just started to drive for the shift).  If there are one or more passengers waiting,
the dispatcher assigns the longest-waiting passenger to this available driver.

## event class details

Simulation events model what happens, and when.  Each event occurs at
some particular time, expressed as positive integers in some suitable
units.  This allows us to order events from earlier to later, using
rich comparison operations 
```__lt__```, ```__gt__```, etc.  We model events with an abstract class \verb|Event|, but we
have to leave what an event does to subclasses that model particular
types of events.

Notice that occurrence of an event may change several elements, and
may schedule new events, in the simulation.

**PassengerRequest event:** A passenger requesting a driver will cause
  the dispatcher to try to assign the quickest-arriving available
  driver to that passenger, or else put the passenger on a waiting list.  If a
  driver is assigned a passenger, they begin driving to the passenger's
  location, and a pickup event is scheduled for the time they arrive.
  A cancellation event is scheduled for the time the passenger runs
  out of patience and cancels the request.  The pickup succeeds or
  fails depending on whether it is scheduled earlier than the
  cancellation.  In either case, the driver's destination is set to
  the passenger's location.

**DriverRequest event:** A driver requesting a passenger will
  cause the dispatcher to assign that driver the longest-waiting
  passenger, if there are any passengers. At the same time, a pickup event is
  scheduled for the time that the driver arrives at the passenger's location.
  The passenger will have already scheduled a cancellation, so again
  pickup success or failure comes down to whether the pickup or
  cancellation is scheduled earlier.  Again, the driver's destination
  is set to the passenger's location, whether the driver arrives for a
  successful pickup or finds that the passenger has cancelled.

**Cancellation event:** A cancellation event simply changes a
  waiting passenger to a cancelled passenger, and doesn't schedule any
  future events.  Of course, if the passenger has already been picked
  up, then they are satisfied and can't be cancelled.

**Pickup event:** A pickup event sets the driver's location to the
  passenger's location.
  If the passenger is waiting, the driver begins giving them a
  trip   and the driver's destination becomes the passenger's
  destination. 
At the same time, a dropoff event is scheduled for the time they will arrive at
  the passenger's destination, and the passenger becomes satisfied.  If the
  passenger has cancelled, a new event for the driver requesting a passenger is
  scheduled to take place immediately, and the driver has no
  destination for the moment.

**Dropoff event:** A dropoff event sets the driver's location to the
  passenger's destination. The driver
  needs more work, so a new event for the driver requesting a passenger is
  scheduled to take place immediately, and the driver has no
  destination for the moment.

All events are monitored, so that statistics can be reported at the
end of the simulation.  This means that, along with the event actions themselves, the event notifies the monitor of what is happening.

## simulation class details
You are implementing an **event-driven simulation**.  This means that
your simulation is driven by a sequence of events, ordered according
to the event sorting order.  The simulation removes the highest
priority event, has it carry out its actions, notifies the monitor of
the event, and then returns to the sequence for the next highest
priority event.

Of course, an interesting simulation will need an initial non-empty
sequence of events to get things started.  Since some events cause new
events to be scheduled, the initial sequence may grow as a result of
processing events.  

Since we don't have any events that schedule new passengers, and all
passengers will end up either cancelled or satisfied, we can assume
that the sequence of events will eventually be empty. This ends the simulation.

When the simulation is finished, it returns a report of any statistics the
monitor has gathered.

## monitor class details


Our monitor records each event when it happens, then uses
those records to calculate and report statistics.

All of our events fall into one of two categories: those initiated by a
driver and those initiated by a passenger.  The monitor is notified of an activity ---
an event's time, category, description (e.g. dropoff, pickup,
cancellation), identifier of the person initiating the event, and the
location relevant to the event --- and records this accordingly.

Making a report requires the monitor to consult its records and
calculate the average passenger waiting time, the average distance
travelled by drivers (including both trips and getting to passenger 
locations) and the average trip distance that each driver is carrying a passenger.

## location class details

Our simulation plays out on a simplified grid of city blocks. Each
location is specified by a pair of non-negative integers, **(m, n)**, where
**m** represents the number of blocks the location is from the
bottom edge of the grid, and **n** is the number of blocks the
location is from the left of the grid.

Since it is not, in general, possible to drive diagonally through
blocks, the distance that determines how quickly a driver can travel
between two locations is
[manhattan distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry).
This distance is the number of horizontal blocks that
separate the two locations (never negative) plus the number of
vertical blocks that separate the two locations (also never negative).

Sometimes our program will need to read a text file that includes
locations, and turn those into location objects.  This is a
module-level function that doesn't need to be a method of a location
class, but can simply be grouped with the class in the same module.

## container class details

Several parts of our simulation will need sequences of objects that
allow us to add new objects, remove already-stored objects, and determine
whether the sequence is empty.  For example, the simulation keeps
track of a sequence of events that is ordered according to event
comparison so that an event with the lowest timestamp is retrieved
ahead of those with a higher timestamp.  Dispatchers keep track of
available drivers and waiting passengers, and will need a similar (but
not identical) tool.

We provide you with an abstract container class so that you can
implement concrete subclasses when you need them.  One concrete subclass
you'll certainly need is a priority queue that maintains its elements
in priority order (using rich comparison operators such as ```__lt__```, ```__gt__```,
etc.) so that the highest-priority element is always ready to be
removed.

## how to use starter code
This trip-sharing simulation needs several cooperating Python classes
to do its job.  Some classes are clients and, in
turn, provide services, so the relationships can become involved.  We
want you to gain maximum experience from doing several activities that computer
scientists do: 

1. reading and comprehending existing code in order to understand
  its relationship to code you must implement;
2. reading and comprehending API-only (i.e.\ interface) code in order to implement
  the body of the code;
3. reading and comprehending client code, in order to implement the
  code for classes that provide(s) the service(s) it requires;
4. reading and comprehending skeleton code with
  comments (those that use ````#```` characters) guiding you to write your own code

The starter code falls into one or more of these learning activities:

**container.py** Instructors provide abstract class ```Container```.  Notice that the methods raise ```NotImplementedError```, and must be
  implemented in each subclass.  Instructors also provide subclass
  ```PriorityQueue```, except they provide only the API for the ```add()```
  method.

**event.py** Instructors provide abstract class ```Event``` which has 
several subclasses:\

- **PassengerRequest** Provided by the instructors;
- 
  **DriverRequest** Skeleton code, with comments;
- 
  **Cancellation, Pickup, Dropoff** Instructors provide the class name and
    client code that uses these classes.

The module-level function ```create_event_list``` has
  skeleton code, with comments to guide students.

**monitor.py** Instructors provide all except methods
  ```_average_total_distance``` and ```_average_trip_distance```, for which we provide the API.

**passenger.py** Instructors provide a class name and
  (elsewhere) client code that uses it.

**dispatcher.py** Instructors provide the API.

**driver.py** Instructors provide the API.

**location.py** Instructors provide the API.

**simulation.py** Instructors provide skeleton code with comments.

**events.txt** Instructors provide an example initial event list. Note: Successfully running simulation.py with this file is no guarantee of a correct implementation.

We suggest that you begin with ```location.py```,
```container.py```, ```passenger.py```, ```driver.py```, and
```dispatcher.py```, testing your work as you go so that you are
confident in it as you proceed.  Then tackle ```event.py```,
```simulation.py```, and ```monitor.py```.

## submitting your work
1. **DOES YOUR CODE RUN**?!  Does it pass your thorough test suite (the additional tests you have to write, not just the sample tests)?
2. Login to MarkUs and find the A1.
3. Submit these files;
   - ```container.py```
   - ```dispatcher.py```
   - ```driver.py```
   - ```event.py```
   - ```location.py```
   - ```monitor.py```
   - ```passenger.py```
   - ```simulation.py```

Don't submit any other file under `A1`.
4. On a lab machine (or your own machine, if you followed the software setup steps), 
download all of the files you submitted into a brand-new folder, and 
test your code once more, thoroughly. *Your code will be tested on the Lab machines,
so it must run in that environment or a similar one (see the Software Setup page).*
5. Congratulations, you are finished with your first **major** assignment in CSC148! 
You are now one step closer to being a wizard/witch who masters parser-tongue. :)

<div align="center"> HAVE FUN and GOOD LUCK! </div>